CONSUMPTION AND TREATMENT                              OCTOBER 2018


  SERVICES: APPLICATION GUIDE

               Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care
 The federal government (Health Canada) remains responsible for granting
exemptions to Section 56.1 of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (CDSA)
to operate Supervised Consumption Services (SCS). Ontario is augmenting
Health Canada’s SCS program to include requirements for treatment and
support services (herein referred to as Consumption and Treatment Services
[CTS]). In order to receive provincial funding for CTS, applicants must
demonstrate their proposed service meets federal requirements, as well as
additional requirements under Ontario’s CTS program. The Consumption and
Treatment Services: Application Guide provides guidance on the provincial CTS
program requirements and the application process.

For information on Health Canada’s SCS program please visit their website.




                                      1
 TABLE OF CONTENTS
Overview of Consumption and Treatment Services ....................................................... 3
Application Requirements .............................................................................................. 5
   Program Criteria .......................................................................................................... 5
         1.     Local Conditions ........................................................................................... 6
         2.     Capacity to Provide Consumption and Treatment Services ........................ 7
         3.     Proximity .................................................................................................... 10
         4.     Community Support and Ongoing Engagement ........................................ 11
         5.     Accessibility ................................................................................................ 13
Program Funding........................................................................................................... 14
   Operational Budget Requests ................................................................................... 14
         Eligible Costs ...................................................................................................... 14
         Capital Budget Requests .................................................................................... 15
         Transfer Payment Agreement(s) ....................................................................... 15
Accountability ............................................................................................................... 16
   Reporting and Evaluation .......................................................................................... 16
   Safety and Security .................................................................................................... 18
   Enforcement .............................................................................................................. 19
Submitting an Application / Requesting Information ................................................... 20
Appendix A: Consumption and Treatment Service Design Standards .......................... 21




                                                               2
 OVERVIEW OF CONSUMPTION AND
TREATMENT SERVICES
In October 2018, Ontario’s Deputy Premier and Minister of Health and Long-
Term Care announced a new program to help people who are struggling with
addiction receive health care and other supports. Consumption and Treatment
Services (CTS) will provide integrated, wrap-around services that connect
clients who use drugs to primary care, treatment, and other health and social
services. The new program will also include requirements to address
community concerns, and ensure ongoing community engagement and liaison
where CTS are established.

Consumption and Treatment Services will be located in communities in need
based on ministry-defined criteria1. They will be established in Community
Health Centres, Aboriginal Health Access Centres or similar incorporated2
health care or community-based organizations that offer integrated, wrap-
around services.

Mandatory services include:

        Supervised consumption (injection, intranasal, oral) and overdose
         prevention services
        Onsite or defined pathways3 to addictions treatment services
        Onsite or defined pathways to wrap-around services including: primary
         care, mental health, housing and/or other social supports
        Harm reduction services:
         o       Education
         o       Distribution and disposal of harm reduction supplies
         o       Provision of naloxone and oxygen



1
    Includes opioid-related morbidity, mortality, and proxy measures for drug use.
2
    Refers to a legal entity capable of entering into contracts.
3
 Defined pathways are mechanisms to ensure clients access the intended service(s), which
can be measured. They may vary by site and/or community. The services should be within
proximity to the CTS (walking or transit distance).


                                                   3
     Removal of inappropriately discarded harm reduction supplies (e.g.
     potentially contaminated needles and other drug use equipment)
     surrounding the CTS area
Based on the findings from the Minister’s review of these services:

    CTS will not be concentrated in one area or neighbourhood, and
     proximity to child care centres, parks and/or schools (including post-
     secondary institutions) will be considered
    CTS operators will be required to support ongoing community
     engagement and liaison initiatives to address local community and
     neighbourhood concerns on an ongoing basis




                                       4
 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
All proposals for a Consumption and Treatment Service (CTS) that are received
by the ministry will be reviewed to ensure that:

    Provincial program criteria are met; and
    Proposed costs are valid, reasonable, and within program funding levels
     based on proposed hours and service capacity.
Applicants which meet the provincial program criteria, and receive an
exemption from Health Canada to establish a supervised consumption service
(SCS), may be considered by the ministry for provincial CTS funding.




PROGRAM CRITERIA
CTS will be assessed based on the following program criteria:



     1         Local conditions


     2         Capacity (to provide treatment and consumption services)


     3         Proximity (to similar services, and to child care centres, parks
               and schools, including post-secondary institutions)


     4         Community support and ongoing community engagement


     5         Accessibility




                                       5
 1. LOCAL CONDITIONS
The ministry will identify communities demonstrating need for CTS based on
the following:

     Mortality data:
      o     Number of opioid-related deaths (i.e. cases)
      o     Rate of opioid-related deaths
     Morbidity data:
      o     Rate of opioid-related emergency department visits
      o     Rate of opioid-related hospitalizations
     Proxy measures for drug use:
      o     Needle distribution
      o     Naloxone distribution and oxygen


CTS site selection will also need to consider the local context. Applicants
should include, if applicable:

     Any local or neighborhood data to support the choice of the proposed
      CTS site
     A description of how the proposed service delivery model is best suited
      to local conditions




                                        6
 2. CAPACITY TO PROVIDE CONSUMPTION AND TREATMENT
   SERVICES
Eligible applicants include Community Health Centres (CHC), Aboriginal Health
Access Centres or similar incorporated health care or community based
organizations that can offer the full range of mandatory services. Preference
will be given to organizations that currently offer, or have the capacity to offer
in partnership, onsite access to services.

        The applicant must either be the proprietor of the site or submit a letter
         of permission from the proprietor with the application.

2.1 INTEGRATED, WRAP-AROUND, MANDATORY SERVICES
The applicant must demonstrate an ability to provide the following services:

        Supervised consumption (injection, intranasal, oral4) and overdose
         prevention services
        Onsite or defined pathways to:
         o      Addictions treatment services
         o      Mental health services
         o      Primary care services
         o      Social services (e.g. housing, food, employment, other)
        Harm reduction services:
         o      Education (on harm reduction , safe drug use practices, safe
                disposal of equipment)
         o      First aid/wound care
         o      Distribution and disposal of harm reduction supplies
         o      Provision of naloxone and oxygen
        Removal of inappropriately discarded harm reduction supplies (e.g.
         potentially contaminated needles and other drug use equipment)
         surrounding the CTS area using appropriate equipment (i.e. needle-
         resistant safety gloves)




4
    The CTS program does not include supervised inhalation services.


                                                7
     Public education
The applicant should include:

    The types of services (e.g. what types of addictions treatment services
     will be offered) and how each will be delivered;
    Which services will be offered onsite, or define the pathways to the
     services; and
    Wait times for services.
Applicants may provide additional optional services based on capacity and
local conditions. These should be described in the application. Please note
optional services may require approval from Health Canada and/or the
ministry based on the type of service.

2.2 SERVICE DELIVERY MODEL
Preference will be given to sites that offer consistent hours of operation, seven
(7) days per week. Proposed hours should be based on local context and
consultation with community stakeholders, local community groups, and
persons with lived experience.

    Applicants will identify the hours of operation
    Applicants will identify the site’s capacity (e.g. number of consumption
     booths)
Applicants should also submit a proposed staffing model to demonstrate how
the CTS meets operational and program requirements:

    A designated health professional must be present at all times
    The staffing model must include peers / persons with lived experience
    The applicant has the capacity within the proposed staffing model to:
     o     Provide immediate overdose response
     o     Prevent and manage security incidents




                                        8
 2.3 SITE REQUIREMENTS
Applicants must meet minimum site requirements:

    Provide a floor plan indicating where:
     o    Service intake, consumption, and post-consumption care (i.e.
          aftercare room) will be located
     o    Other mandatory services will occur
     o    Hand hygiene sink and foot wash station will be located
     o    Accessible washrooms will be located
    Verify the facility meets municipal bylaws and provincial regulations for
     accessibility
    Verify the site meets ministry design standards for a consumption
     service (see Appendix A)
    Verify physical safety and security measures are in place to ensure client,
     staff and community safety including:
     o    Provincial and municipal safety requirements
     o    Fire safety plan
     o    Security plan
     o    Paramedics and other first responders have access to the
          consumption and post-consumption (i.e. aftercare) rooms.
     o    Occupational health and safety requirements
     o    Infection prevention and control requirements




                                       9
 3. PROXIMITY

3.1 PROXIMITY TO SIMILAR SERVICES
The ministry will assess each applicant’s proximity to other Consumption and
Treatment Services or similar services:

     Applicants should outline the site’s distance, in metres or kilometres,
      from their site to other local CTS (or similar services). CTS should be
      located at least 600m (i.e. two large city blocks) from each other.

3.2 PROXIMITY TO PARKS, SCHOOLS AND CHILD CARE CENTRES
The ministry will also assess the applicant’s proximity to licensed child care
centers, parks, and schools (including post-secondary institutions):

     Applicants should outline the site’s distance, in metres or kilometres, to
      the closest licensed child care centre, park and schools
      o     If the proposed site is within close proximity (e.g. 100m - 200m) to
            any of these, the applicant must specify how community concerns
            will be addressed through community consultation, and through
            ongoing community engagement.
     Applicants will require evidence of support by local stakeholders,
      including residents.




                                        10
 4. COMMUNITY SUPPORT AND ONGOING ENGAGEMENT
Community consultation is a requirement of the federal CDSA exemption
application and does not have to be carried out separately for the Ontario
program application, provided the consultation meets provincial requirements.

The consultation should allow the ministry to understand the efforts that have
been taken to engage with stakeholders to inform them of the potential CTS,
and to learn about potential impacts to people who use drugs and the local
community, and how those can be mitigated.

The application must include a description of consultation activities that were
undertaken for the proposed CTS site. Results from the consultations,
including all feedback and comments that were received, should be provided
in a summary report. Examples of consultation tools include, but are not
limited to:

    Door-to-door or other canvassing (e.g. flyers)
    General email account (to receive feedback and respond to inquiries)
    Information meetings / open houses
    Presenting at community associations or other meetings
    Survey
    Website, including opportunities for individuals to submit feedback

At a minimum, the following stakeholders should be consulted on the CTS:

    Health and social service stakeholders (i.e. addictions treatment, mental
     health, housing)
    Local businesses and/or business associations;
    Local citizens and/or community groups;
    Local municipality;
    Police and other emergency services;
    Public health (local board of health); and
    Persons with lived experience.
Applicants may include additional stakeholders in their consultation process.




                                       11
 As part of their application, applicants:

     Must submit a consultation report that provides:
       o Who was consulted;
       o A summary of feedback from each stakeholder group;
       o Concerns raised by stakeholder groups, if any; and,
       o How concerns will be addressed.
     Must obtain and submit local municipal council support (i.e. council
      resolution) endorsing the CTS
     Should submit other evidence of support for the CTS. This can include,
      but is not limited to:
       o Letters of support from partnering organizations, local businesses
         and/or other stakeholders
       o Board of health resolution
     Applicants must also submit a community engagement and liaison plan
      which outlines how the community will be engaged on an ongoing basis.
      The plan may include:
       o Follow-up(s) after initial consultations
       o Public education about CTS
       o Engagement mechanisms to identify and address community
         concerns on an ongoing basis




                                        12
 5. ACCESSIBILITY

5.1 FULLY ACCESSIBLE
    Applicants must verify the CTS is compliant with the Accessibility for
     Ontarians with Disabilities Act.
    Applicants must also demonstrate how the services offered are culturally,
     demographically, and gender appropriate.
    Applicants must also demonstrate how the CTS is:
     o     Strategically located (i.e. walking distance from where open drug
           use is known to occur);
     o    Easily accessible by public transit.




                                      13
 PROGRAM FUNDING
OPERATIONAL BUDGET REQUESTS
Applicants must submit a budget which provides a breakdown of all the
operational costs, including a brief description and rationale for the quantity
and cost for each item requested (e.g. how the item would be used, by whom,
and an explanation in the rare case where existing staffing or equipment
cannot be leveraged).5


ELIGIBLE COSTS
Only Full-Time Equivalent employees (FTEs) and supplies directly associated
with the consumption service, post consumption space, referrals, and/or
addressing community concerns will be eligible for funding. The program
funding will not cover direct costs of wrap-around services.

Operational cost items can include:

        Salaries and benefits;
        Supplies and services; and
        Program, administrative, phone and IT expenses.
         o      The program will fund up to a maximum of 10% of total operating
                budget for administrative and IT expenses6.
Operating costs will be assessed against comparative provincial services of
similar size and scale.

Once the Minister has approved final operational costs, an official funding
letter will be issued.

Funding must not be used for physician funding to deliver clinical services.




5
    A budget template can be provided by the ministry upon request.
6
 Admissible administrative expenses include: audit, accounting and payroll cost. Costs
associated with job postings and staffing recruitment for CTS, travel, and conferences are not
covered. IT equipment is considered an operational expense; however, furniture expenses are
considered a capital expenditure.


                                               14
 CAPITAL BUDGET REQUESTS
Applicants with one-time funding requests for capital infrastructure,
renovations, and retrofits of facilities to plan, establish and operate CTS must
indicate the need for capital funding in their application.

The ministry will work with applicants to determine capital funding
requirements immediately following a notification of the Minister’s approval
of a site. The ministry will provide an overview of the capital funding process,
the application form, and the ministry’s funding guide.

Applicants are encouraged to contact the Ministry’s Addiction and Substances
Policy and Programs Unit (see Submitting an Application/Requesting
Information Section) early on in the planning process to discuss capital funding
requests.


TRANSFER PAYMENT AGREEMENT(S)
All applicants approved for provincial funding must agree to and sign a transfer
payment agreement with the MOHLTC prior to receiving any funds.
Agreements will outline the roles and responsibility of each party and the
accountability and reporting requirements which the CTS provider must
adhere to, including financial reporting and reporting on program indicators
and outcomes.

All providers will be required to provide quarterly financial reports and annual
audited financial statements to the MOHLTC. All providers will also be
required to submit monthly and annual program reports (see Monitoring,
Reporting and Evaluation Section).




                                       15
 ACCOUNTABILITY
REPORTING AND EVALUATION
As part of the monitoring and reporting requirements, CTS will be required to
report on the following indicators on a monthly basis:

     Site data:
      o      # of visits and # of unique clients (i.e. individuals)
     Provision of wrap-around services and treatment uptake:

      Access/Uptake
      o      # of clients initiating onsite addictions treatment services7:
                         Opioid agonist treatment (e.g. methadone, suboxone)
                         Other (e.g. detox, residential or community treatment)
      o      # of clients accessing onsite mental health services
      o      # of clients accessing onsite primary care services
      o      # of visits where clients received counselling services in CTS
      o      # of times first aid or basic care (i.e. abscess, foot, wound) was
             provided
      o      # of clients accessing onsite social services:
                         Housing
                         Other
      Referral
      o      # of clients referred to addictions treatment services
      o      # of clients referred to mental health services
      o      # of clients referred to social services:
                         Housing
                         Other



7
 Additional data on initiation to Rapid Access Addiction Medicine Clinics (RAAMs) through CTS
will be collected through RAAM quarterly reporting and provided to the ministry by the Local
Health Integration Networks.


                                             16
    Safety and security:
    o      # of times security staff assisted with an incident in the CTS
    o      # of times security staff addressed a security event in the
           immediate perimeter of the CTS
    o      # of times police were called to the CTS
   Visits:
    o     Visits by time of day (morning, afternoon, evening, overnight)
    o      Visits by mode of consumption (injection, intranasal, oral)
    o      Where injection was peer-assisted (if applicable)
    o      Non-identifiable client demographics (male/female/other clients,
           clients under 25 years, clients 25 to 64 years, clients 65 and over)
    o      Drugs consumed by clients (as reported at intake)
   Overdose events:
    o      # of overdoses
    o      # of overdoses treated solely with oxygen/rescue breathing and
           stimulation
    o      # of overdoses treated with naloxone
    o      # of doses of naloxone administered (for overdoses treated with
           naloxone)
    o      # of deaths occurring in the CTS
   Emergency service calls:
        o # of 911 calls related to an overdose:
                     # of clients transported to an emergency department
                      related to an overdose
        o # of 911 calls for other reasons (by reason)
                      # of clients transported to an emergency department
                      for other reasons (by reason)
   Provision of basic care and education:
    o      # of visits where client received harm reduction education or
           information
    o      # of visits where needle exchange/syringe services were provided
           for non-CTS use



                                       17
      o     Frequency of needle pick-ups in the surrounding area of the CTS
     o     # of needles removed (i.e. picked up) in the surrounding area of
           the CTS
    Community engagement and liaison:
     o     Description of community engagement and liaison efforts,
           including issues raised and how they have been mitigated
    Other:
     o     Drug checking usage data, if applicable
     o     Additional comments (at discretion of CTS provider)


To ensure that the CTS programs are efficacious and are achieving provincial
objectives, each CTS provider will need to complete an annual report, subject
to the criteria provided by the ministry. The ministry will also complete an
evaluation of all provincially funded CTS operations.




SAFETY AND SECURITY
CTS must have mechanisms (i.e. policies and procedures) around security,
access, and removal of used harm reduction equipment. CTS will:

    Control CTS site access (only those intending to use the services will be
     allowed to enter the CTS);
    Discourage loitering outside the CTS;
    Ensure staff are trained on instances in which law enforcement should
     be contacted (i.e. substances left at a CTS);
    Ensure staff are trained on Infection Prevention and Control (IPAC)
     procedures including needle handling and disposal policy and/or
     procedures; and
    Comply with Health Canada rules related to possession, production,
     trafficking/sharing, and administering of substances within the CTS




                                      18
 ENFORCEMENT
The Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care, or any authorized representative,
will inspect the organization’s operations and compliance with CTS program
requirements, which may include, but is not limited to: safety and security
provisions, and frequency of needle removal/pick-ups.

The ministry or any authorized representative may also audit or review CTS
documentation and reports to ensure compliance with other program
requirements (i.e. onsite or defined pathways to addictions treatment, and
wrap-around services).

A progressive enforcement approach will be used for any inspection or review.

CTS may also be subject to inspections by the Ministry of Labour and Health
Canada.




                                      19
 SUBMITTING AN APPLICATION /
REQUESTING INFORMATION
Completed Consumption and Treatment Service application forms and
accompanying documents should be submitted to:

Addiction and Substances Policy and Programs Unit
Health Improvement Policy and Programs Branch
Population and Public Health Division
Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care
Email: addictionandsubstances@ontario.ca



Questions about the application process may be forwarded to:
addictionandsubstances@ontario.ca




                                    20
   APPENDIX A: CONSUMPTION AND
  TREATMENT SERVICE DESIGN STANDARDS
  Below are room/space types and square foot sizing, based on international
  best practices for three to six consumption booths and potential operational
  models.

Room Type                Description             Size       For Six    For Three
                                                            Booths     Booths

Consumption booth        Partitioned             40sf per   240sf      120sf
                         desk/table with chair   person

Assessment Room          Accommodates            100sf      100sf      100sf
                         interviewer
                         workstation/chair
                         and client/chair (two
                         chairs if needed)

Observation area         Workstations for        65sf       130sf      65sf
                         supervisor staff
                         (workstation and
                         chair)

Post-                   Space for at least six   120sf      120sf      100sf
consumption (aftercare) client chairs and one
                                                                       (three to
area                    small desk/chair for
                                                                       four client
                        supervisory staff
                                                                       chairs and a
                                                                       desk /chair
                                                                       for
                                                                       supervisor)




                                        21
 CHCs are typically Class D occupancy buildings (under the Ontario Building
Code) and built to the OBC standard of the year of construction.

The nature of the CTS self-administered “treatment” will likely define this
group as individuals potentially needing more time and assistance for
evacuation in the event of fire (due to potential degree of incapacitation).
Therefore, this space will likely be considered a B2 occupancy under the
Ontario Building Code and if so, will require additional physical renovations to
upgrade fire separations, upgrades to the HVAC system, fire alarm systems
and doors to these areas. The use of “cookers” may also prompt some other
directions from the Ontario Fire Marshal’s office.

As a best practice the injection area should include:

    Counter space of ±3 linear feet per client;
    The counter space should be, non-porous, hygienic and easily cleanable
     (stainless steel is typical for most CTS sites);
    Appropriate biohazard waste disposal should be available for each client;
    Fixed mirrors should be provided for each client;
    Appropriate lighting should be provided to promote safe injection
     practice;
    Finish surfaces (i.e. wall, floor) should be non-porous and easily
     cleanable;
    A staff monitoring area should be provided in the post-consumption
     room with an emergency communication system;
    Lockable supply cabinets should be provided in the room;
    A hand hygiene sink and foot wash station should be provided in the CTS
     facility;
    Security and access control should be considered as part of the model of
     care;
    CSA Class-C ventilation should be provided in the space. Consideration
     should be given to the unique ventilation needs dependent on the
     permitted uses of the site; specifically, enhanced ventilation should be
     considered if “cooking” is permitted.
    Other space(s) for clients to relax and/or access care while observation
     continues, and to provide wrap-around services.


                                       22

